The second wave feminists I've talked to, they're very worried about the kind of woke
gender identity movement because it's reducing women to just body parts.
Like a guy can say, well, if I just get breast implants and I can have a
vaginoplasty made out of a piece of my skin, and I'm in, I'm the woman, right?
It's like, well, no, because women are not just, it's an ass, right?
I mean, there's more to it than that.
For decades, Michael Shermer has been one of the most popular and provocative
explicators of science to popular audiences, having authored bestselling books such as
Why People Believed Weird Things, Why Darwin Matters, The Moral Ark, and The Mind of the Market.
He founded Skeptic Magazine in 1992, hosts a video podcast with leading activists and
intellectuals, and for nearly 20 years authored a widely read column for Scientific American in
which he debunked beliefs in UFOs and other paranormal phenomena, explained the rise of
the new atheism, and showed how evolution systematically informs human behavior.
Shermer's work is deeply and explicitly rooted in libertarian and enlightenment ideas
about individual responsibility, free market economics, rationality,
and the search for something approaching objective truth.
In 2019, Scientific American cut him loose, a move he ascribes to the publication suffocating
embrace of the sort of identity politics and wokeness that he says dominates academic circles
and increasingly the culture at large.
Les Falle Shermer, who holds a PhD in the history of science and teaches Skepticism 101 at Chapman
University, started a weekly sub-stack where he hosts podcasts and the columns he would have written
for Scientific American. The 67-year-old former competitive cyclist talked with Reason during
Freedom Fest in annual gathering in Las Vegas about the fundamental clash between wokeness
and scientific inquiry, how hard it is to overcome the cognitive biases we all have,
why he thinks trans athletes should be banned from most women's sports, why we have so much
trouble acknowledging moral and technological progress, and why he now identifies as a classical
liberal rather than as a libertarian.
Michael Shermer, thanks for talking to Reason.
Nice to see you again.
So you last year, last fall, you started a sub-stack publication to go along with Skeptic
Magazine and whatnot, and one of the early pieces was titled Scientific American Goes Woke,
and you were a longtime columnist for Scientific American, a very popular science communicator.
Describe what you wrote about in Scientific American Goes Woke and why you started a sub-stack.
Right. So I started Scientific American 2001, and I went almost 18 years, 214 consecutive monthly
columns. I was going for Steve Gold's 300 that he did in Natural History Magazine,
which would have taken me to April 2025, so I didn't quite make that. They terminated the column.
There was no particular reason given other than, well, we're going different ways,
and it's time for a change. They didn't say, hey, we've gone woke, and you're an old non-woke
guy. But I could kind of see the writing in the wall. Last couple of columns I had written
were dealing with some issues kind of related to race and sex and gender and that sort of thing,
and I could feel the uncomfortableness in the editorial process, and then boom, they let it go.
So I mean, I don't know for sure, but that was it. So I started the sub-stack just because
I still had more writing in me. I like writing the columns, but this gives me a little more
flexibility if I want to go more than 700 words, like nope, more. And also the new media, I try
to keep up with, I have a podcast and what all the kids are doing these days. It's hard to know
what's the right path to take, but it seemed like the sub-stack thing was a way to go. The finances
for it are channeled through the skeptic society, which is kind of my day job. So the first one,
Scientific American Goes Woke, I recounted my own experiences, but also I went through a bunch of
articles they had published recently that were clearly what most people would identify as sort of
far-left, woke progressive politics. And one of the most notorious or discussed pieces had to do
with E.O. Wilson being a racist, right? Being a scientific racist. He's the, he wrote the book
Sociobiology. He, you know, in a lot of ways, you know, his vision of taking evolution and seriously
applying it or trying to apply to human society and whatnot had always been a fraught project,
right? I mean, he was getting pictures of Waterport over him in the 70s at conferences.
Yeah. But that, could you talk a little bit about that?
Yeah, that was one of them.
Because then you wrote about that.
Yeah, in fact, they published this right after he died. So, you know, the body's not even cold
yet. And already he's being accused of being a, you know, kind of race realist, race science,
racist, implied racist, that kind of thing, even though he's not. So one of my other sub-stacks
was a long piece, kind of dissecting the claims against Wilson show that they're absolutely
false. But the worst thing about the Scientific American piece on him was that they provided
no evidence at all, no quotes from him, you know, saying something about the race,
racial differences in IQ, nothing like that. And in fact, there's tons of quotes from him
that I included in my piece where he's like, this can absolutely not be considered evidence of
racial differences between groups. And, you know, and this is no justification for discrimination
of any kind. You know, I, I abhor the, you know, kind of the old race science stuff.
I mean, he made it clear he doesn't go into it. So that was disturbing. They had another one on
how mathematics has gone, has kind of gone racist and bigoted and, I don't know, misogynistic.
And their evidence for this is that there are more male math professors than female
math professors, which is not, I mean, the explanation for that could be that, well,
all these old guys are just race misogynists against women. But there are other hypotheses
and you would think a scientific publication would say, okay, here are the three explanations for
why there is an asymmetry in the number of professors who are male versus female, right?
So you have, well, maybe they're just a bunch of misogynists, okay, maybe, maybe there's a pipeline
issue, right? That, that, you know, decades ago, young girls went different pathways than young
boys and fewer of them ended up in STEM fields. So that by the time you get to now where they're
being hired, there's just few of them to select for, because every professor I know is uber-liberal
and they're all dying to hire more women in STEM fields. So it's not like behind closed doors,
they're going, hey, you know, I know we said this publicly, but, you know, we just want to hire more
white guys. They're not doing that, right? So, you know, what are some other hypotheses here?
You know, the evolutionary psych one as well, there may be an interest difference that, you know,
men migrate boys, migrate toward toys and things and stuff. Women girls migrate more toward
people. And so that, that kind of sorts out later, decades later into the kind of profession
you prefer to go into. So women tend to migrate more toward, you know, medical degrees and biology
and psychology, social science, men more in the STEM fields. Now, which of those is the right
hypothesis? Let's just set that aside. Why can't a scientific publication even say, here are the
three hypotheses? Let's look at the evidence. Scientific American is either the oldest or
one of the very oldest continuously published magazines in the world, certainly in the US.
You know, and it went through phases in the 19th century where it's like, okay, yeah, it's talking
about scientific racism, other times it's super liberal, etc. What do you think is driving the
publication or, and the broader, I don't know, you know, kind of popular science community towards
wokeism or, you know, a lot of attention to identity politics where that becomes a controlling kind
of idea apart from anything that they're actually discussing. It's definitely new and it's really
just in the last five years. I think it coincides with the general trend in culture in general of
moving more in that direction. As younger people get those jobs and kind of moving up the demographic
scale, they're getting more and more powerful jobs to direct things the way they want. They came of
age, you know, when those subjects were really important. Now, there's not much any one of us
can do like about the George Floyd incident or this thing or that thing that we see on the news
constantly. But I can do something. I can say, well, look, I'm not a police chief. I'm not a
mayor, but I'm an editor. So I can kind of tilt the editorial decisions more toward the kinds of
political directions we want to take the country. And I'm doing my little share. And I think it
makes people feel like I'm doing something, right? Like, again, what can I do about the George Floyd
thing or police violence or whatever? Nothing, but I can go down in March, right? I'm going down
there this afternoon, and I'm going to carry my plan. Makes me feel like I'm doing something because,
you know, humans are very moral or moralistic. We like to moralize about things and express
our outrage. That kind of protest does have effect, right? Yes, it can. Absolutely. You mentioned
earlier on, you know, kind of being of an older vintage. We're of similar vintage. How old are
you? I'm 67. Okay. So is part of this just like, you know, when we call it wokeism, you know, 20
years ago, we would have called it political correctness. I think our parents were, you know,
we disappointed them or we defined ourselves against them is part of the woke conversation.
It's just generational warfare that is to be expected. And if not tolerated, like, you know,
of course, right? I mean, this is a way, you know, and I hate to say it in this
crude a term, but like, so you're a guy, you're, you're an old guy, you've been at on the mass
set of Scientific American for 20 years. And it's like, we, you know, you're not retiring,
you're, you're probably in better health than you were 10 years ago. And it looks like you're
going to live forever. Like, how the fuck do we get rid of you? Right. So yeah, have we become our
parents? There may be a little bit of that just kind of generational shifts. But, but, but that
doesn't really matter. The question is, what's the right thing to do? What's the truth? What,
what's the direction we want to take the country? And what do we really know about
this subject or that subject? Right. So, I mean, if I may, I mean, you have in one of the
sub stack columns, a fantastopies, where you say you're raising that is to figure out what is right,
not to be right. That's a powerful statement. Can you kind of expand on that a little bit? Yes.
Well, because, because I study belief systems for a living, and I'm aware of all the cognitive
biases, I can see them in myself. And so to avoid that, you just have to kind of focus on,
instead of looking for evidence confirmation bias to support what I already believe,
got to look for the counter evidence, you know, what, what are the arguments against the, the
belief cycle, like this issue on abortion, I'm hardcore pro choice, but I purposely solicited
a pro life argument and said, please give me like the 10 best arguments you have. I want to hear them,
right? Because I don't really know what they are, because I don't pay attention to that closely,
right? So we ended up doing that you have to do in general. And is, are you, is wokeism for lack of
a better term, but our identity politics, is it, are you worried about it? Not because, you know,
you lose your scientific American column as much as this means we're not focused on trying to figure
out what is right, what is true, what is correct, but rather we're kind of trying to create a narrative
and maintain things that may or may not be true. Yeah, the word woke is pretty loaded now, and
it's changed already. I heard John McWhorter talking about this, the linguist, you know, it used to
be a cold term. I mean, you and I would have been woke, probably in the 90s, because we were libertarian
in favor of individual freedom rights or whatever. And now that word is mean something completely
different. So, but in general, and I don't want to pick on scientific American, I like the people
I work with there and so forth. It's happening across the board, Twitter is mostly run by,
you know, these kind of work progressives. And, you know, most science and nature, the two most
prominent publications are running articles about this, you know, the and the Lancet had that cover
story of, you know, we have long medicine is long neglected. What was it people who give birth?
Right. If only we had a word for this, right, right, that kind of thing. So, you know, the
line, but there is a truth. I mean, like beyond the language terminology, it is true that like
women, you know, women who give birth were often times a medical discourse were kind of seen as
like bystanders. Well, yes. Right. So, there is a sociology here that's worth kind of rehearsing
and understanding and unpacking. Well, and I think that the second wave feminists I've talked to,
like Helen Joyce, Carol Tavers, they're very just worried about the kind of woke gender identity
movement because it's reducing women to just body parts. Like a guy can say, well, if I just
get breast implants and I can have a vaginoplasty made out of a piece of my skin, and I'm in, I'm
a woman, right? It's like, well, no, because women are not just tits and ass, right? I mean, there's
more to it than that. A lot more. That's a very 70s woke. Women are more than tits and ass. That's
like very progressive. Before we talk about, I want to talk about trans issues and abortion and
gun control and a couple of other things. As you've written, you know, your sub stack is
absolutely one of like my must reads. I appreciate it because I didn't have a subscription to
Scientific American and I didn't always go there and you can go long. So, and I also want to talk
about you have a great piece about independent media and why that's important, especially in
today's kind of cancel culture world. But before we get there, and this goes to that question of
you want to be right, you want to find out what is right but not be right, you started out, you
used to call yourself a libertarian. And now you say, I'm not a libertarian anymore. I'm a classical
liberal and just as a kind of framing device. How, how does that relate? What does that mean? And
how is that related to your interest in finding out what is right, not being right? Yeah, well,
the language does matter and the word libertarian has gotten a lot of baggage over the past quarter
century or so. I mean, here we are at Freedom Fest, there's quite a wide range of people and
they believe rather different things. But to the general public is like, oh, those are those people
that the preppers that want to think the world's gonna end, got to get Bitcoin and gold and guns.
And, you know, it's like, well, I'm not really one of those, right? And, you know, and also,
you know, when you called yourself a libertarian, what, what did libertarianism do?
I think more of a kind of an iron rand, you know, just everybody just be self-reliance, be
self-responsible. I guess the core would be the individual as the fundamental unit
of society and their autonomy and liberty to make the choices they want. Right. So,
this is my concern about conservatives. They, they say that, you know, we believe in liberty and
autonomy and so, but they don't, you know, they very much care at what consenting adults do in
the privacy of their bedrooms because they think it's going to leak out and cause the moral corruption
of the family and then the community and then the society and then the nation. And, and I think
that's the wrong focus because that's kind of a collectivist argument, right? The nation is over
the society. Well, it is true. I think it was Rick Santorum and Bill O'Reilly at various points
talked about how you have gay marriage and then the next thing you know, men are marrying ducks.
And obviously we're all engaged to waterfowl, right? So, they're not, so how, why does classical
liberal, like, why do you think that's a better descriptor for you? I guess I like the word.
I don't know. It has sort of a gravitas to it. I like it. And it, by the way historians talk about
the founding fathers and the, though they were classical liberals and you kind of look back
and know, yeah, I agree with that. I like that. Yeah. Just as a kind of a, well, a fuzzy set,
as I call it, or a family resemblance of a concept, a schema that allows us to capture a bunch of stuff
without firm borders where, you know, that we can overlap and we're both this, but you believe
that and I believe that and that's okay. And you have a wonderful column about the Kardashian.
You use family, you know, a Wittgensteinian family resemblance concept and you use the
Kardashians, which is kind of a great way to think about it because there is something,
I don't want to say essential, but there is kind of something essential to being a Kardashian,
even if you don't have the same parents or the same genetics, right? Yeah, that's right. Yeah,
exactly. So classical liberal for you, that, you know, that kind of fuzzy set or family resemblance.
And for libertarian, you think over the past 25 years, it's become too kind of prepper, too extreme?
It's a little too, yeah, a little fringy, but also a little hyper focused on the individual. It's not
like we should be free to do absolutely anything, anytime we want. Of course, that's not true. You
can't drive on the right side of the road or the left side of the road on any given day. However,
you feel that day, right? We give up our freedoms all the time. And, you know, the, if you read the
Federalist papers, this is what they talk about all the time. We want to give people freedom,
but, you know, of course we have to have this and that. We need a standing army. So do you think
libertarian has become synonymous with anarchism? Well, that's an old mistake people used to make.
And sometimes you have to correct that. No, I think it's more affiliated with like,
you know, Ron Paul, Rand Paul, I don't know, the kind of Second Amendment fundamentalist,
you know, the gun nutters. So it's, we're going to talk about gun nuts and preppers fit into that.
And also Christians, right? Evangelical Christians. Ron Paul and Rand Paul are the Baptists.
Well, libertarians are kind of all over the map on religiosity, right?
Yeah. I mean, you guys have been surveys on this. Some of them are religious, but others
are not. No, and you have on the one hand, you have people like on Rand and then you have people
like Ron Paul. And, you know, certainly over the past 20 years, Ron Paul is probably the
single biggest factor when people say, I become libertarian. It's because they've encountered
Ron Paul. So he's a huge, you know, tributary into libertarian, the libertarian movement.
And do you think, you know, if you're, if you're kind of an evangelical Christian,
can you be, obviously, everybody can call themselves libertarian, but are you,
could you be in that family of people who, so what is the, I think kind of what's the,
what's the litmus has or what's the Maginot line there where you're like, okay,
I can't do this. I would say consistency of principles across different issues. And
I'm more critical of conservatives than libertarians on that for sure. But like when,
when DeSantis sick the government on Disney. Now, I'm not crazy about Disney's woke
progressive politics and we're going to introduce these characters into our cartoons.
Okay. Well, you know, but, but the libertarian way of dealing with that or
what should have been the old conservative way of dealing with that is, well, I'm just not going to
go to and give my money to Disney. I won't go to their films. I won't go to their parks and so on.
But DeSantis is like, no, the conservative thing to do is we're going to slap them with,
you know, with, with higher taxes and regulations. It's like, when did that become a conservative
thing? Right. So I, and I do think libertarians are, okay, where's the consistency say for foreign
policy? You know, don't we have a moral obligation to help people that are under
suppression of civil liberties around the world? You know, sometimes we do, sometimes we
where's the balance there? I don't know. I guess as a fuzzy set, I would say classical liberalism
and libertarianism, they're either in the same or they're too very overlapping.
Yeah. No, and you're not alone in this. And I'm curious, you know,
Penn Gillette obviously famously also kind of voice similar misgivings. And it's interesting
when high profile libertarians like yourself starts to say, you know what, I don't know,
I kind of want to be in a different club. And again, I wonder if part of it is generational.
I mean, because when you say, you know, kind of like second amendment people,
do you feel like the movement is more focused on gun rights now than it was in 1990?
Now it is, yes, because of all the mass public shootings and the government response to this.
And that drives up gun sales. You know, ironically, Obama probably did more for
gun sales than anybody, even though he actually never did much. Right, right. No, he actually,
in his first term, he allowed people to carry weapons on Amtrak at a national park. So he
actually was liberalizing, but people certainly fundraised against the idea that he was a gun
grabber. Well, we've seen this kind of consistency, my body, my choice, in the two different issues
of abortion and vaccines. And each side is like, you know, pretty hypocritical about this.
Do you feel with COVID? Is that also a place where, you know, libertarian, libertarian skepticism
towards state power is one thing. And then, you know, but you also want good science and
good public policy. And then there was a lot within the libertarian movement, I think,
there was a lot of not simply being anti-vaccine mandates, but being anti-vaccine.
See here, I would say the libertarian position would be, I don't like mandates. And yeah,
okay, that's just a principle, government forcing you to do something. But on the other hand, to say,
well, but if the vaccines really work, and the CDC and the Fauci are saying we should all get them,
if I go along with that, then the next step is going to be the mandates. And I don't want that.
So I'm going to be skeptical of the science. Right. No, no, no. It's okay to just say, look,
we should all do this. And by the way, most of us really should get vaccinated. They work.
And there is within your conception of libertarianism, there is a public, I mean,
you're not an anarchist, you believe the state has legitimacy in certain roles and that there are,
and you know, I would argue maybe COVID is not that case, but that if there is a communicable
disease, and there is a vaccine that prevents me from giving it to you, whether you asked for it
or not, there's a role for the state to say, now you have to get vaccinated. In the same way,
you have to pay taxes. Now you're really, yeah, I know we need a standing army, we need a police
force and, you know, and so forth to protect our freedoms and our property rights and so on,
how are you going to do that? And if you say, well, I don't, I'm not participating. I'm not
paying taxes. You didn't sign that social contract. So you'll free ride. So you would say you did not,
you did not change, libertarianism changed, maybe or something like that. Well, let's,
let's talk about your abortion pieces, because this is also something I'm, so I'm 50, I'm about to
turn 59. And when I joined Reason in 93, and I had grown up reading Reason. So, and that's how I
became a libertarian. And I would say everybody I knew who was a libertarian basically said either
they were pro-choice affirmatively that abortion, at least through a certain point in pregnancy,
was a woman's right. And it was nobody's business and that it was not a morally bad issue. It might
be morally complicated. And that even people who were pro-life would say, you know, this is not
something this state should be involved in. That no longer seems to be the case among libertarians.
And in, even though it still seems to be the case in the public at large, only about 20%
according to Gallup or against abortion under all circumstances, that's been very consistent
since Roe was decided. It's religion. Yes. I mean, Reagan was pro-choice until, as I understand it,
Jerry Bowell sat him down and said, I can deliver you millions of votes, but you got to get,
yeah, I'm not sure if that's, I mean, he definitely signed a, you know, a very liberal law in California
as governor and then at various points recanted. And I'm not sure if the motivation for that. But
you know, what you, you say, and I found this really fascinating because you said I am pro-choice
and you started out definitely very, you know, pro-abortion basically through the term
pregnancy. And now you are still pro-choice, but it's more complicated. Can you, can you make the
case for, you know, why abortion should be allowed? Okay. Well, first of all, I'll give a nod to the
pro-lifers that it is a human life that's developing, you know, from the day one, it's a potential human
life. It's not a legal person and so forth. And so, you know, here is, you know, what Richard
Dawkins calls the tyranny of the discontinuous mind. If you, if you're stuck in black and white,
on or off, it's only two sides. There's no continuum. You're going to get very confused
in your thinking about these kinds of issues, right? So you have to draw the line somewhere.
You know, why is, why is a 17-year-old not allowed to whatever vote or something that an 18-year-old
can on the next day? Okay. Well, it's because the law has to draw the line somewhere. Science
doesn't have that kind of demarcation, right? So we do those kinds of things all the time and,
and so I'm willing to say you're right, it's a life. But the female, the mother is also a life
and it's also a legal person and far more advanced than the two-day-old fetus or the
three-month-old fetus or whatever. So, you know, as Thomas Sowell says, there are no solutions,
there's just compromises. And when you have conflicting rights, something has to give,
like the trans athletes, you know, women's rights, trans rights, the conflict when men
want to compete in women's division. Something has to go. You can't have both. So we just have
to make a decision whose rights should we favor in this case. So in that case, I said, well,
the adult woman should be given the nod. Just in principle, you know, individual autonomy and
liberty and control over your own body, that's fundamental. Even while saying, but don't put
yourself in that position where you have to make that choice. It's not a good choice to have to
make, you know, it happens. So, okay, we should be your choice to do it if you want to. But, you
know, as I tell my students, you know, two words, birth control, right, just be, you know, be prepared.
Are you satisfied with the, you know, or not satisfied, but how do you feel about the Dobs
decision, which gets rid of the right of abortion at the national level? So now you had invoked
the Federalist Papers, just thinking about federalism. And now we have 50 states that are
laboratories of democracy. It sounds good in principle, right? But because I know a lot of
pro-lifers and they're all pretty much evangelical Christians. And, you know, overturning row is
just the first step. They want to ban it every state. They will chase people down to the bitter end
to get them to stop having abortions and there any conditions. And that scares me. And so it's,
do you worry that on the flip side of that, that, you know, some states are now going,
that are pro-life or pro-choice are going to, you know, where they might have had regulation of
abortion in, you know, the after viability or, you know, later in the pregnancy are going to be
like, okay, as a response to, you know, if we're California and we're neighboring a state that
is getting rid of all, you know, life begins at the moment of conception, we're going to say
abortion is allowed until the moment of birth. Yeah. Right. So there's extremists on both sides.
Yeah. So the pro-choicers that say, should be okay to abort your fetus the day before you're
supposed to give birth. Of course that's wrong. You know, and again, you get away from the binary
thinking you then you can see a spectrum. Yeah. Okay. So let's just draw the line. I know three
months in Germany is three months, maybe four months. Right. Yeah. And then, okay, so that's
like the age 17 to 18. Okay. There. Right there. That's the time. Do you feel like we, I mean,
and this is interesting when you're talking about kind of gradient thinking or, you know,
things on a continuum, that to me, and we've talked about postmodernism versus, you know,
kind of modernism or whatever in the past, but it's, you know, in the 21st century, it seems like
on certain levels, we're much more comfortable with gradients and a kind of range of options.
And we realize that things are kind of continuous. It's not, even though this is the digital age,
it's not, you know, black and white, it's not one in zero, right? Right. But on other levels, we
seem to be, you know, I mean, and the abortion question is, you know, seems to be front and
center on this of like, no, it is either murder at all stages or it is not. Right. And that just
seems like a terrible way to kind of be engaging reality. Exactly. Right. And again, on the consistency
issue, if, you know, if conservatives are really pro-life, you know, they don't seem to be very
pro-life after you're born, right? It's just a George Carlin's riff. Right. You know, after that,
you're on your own, you know. Now, of course, Christians will, because he does that riff about,
you know, no preschool support, no school lunches, no help for single moms and on and on and on.
Of course, the conservatives will say, no, no, no, it's, we just don't want the government
providing those, that's the job of religion or whatever. And then he throws in the little line
until you become military age. And then we're interested in you again. Okay. So there's some
truth to that humor. Right. And so again, that consistency, you know, if you really care. Why
is consistency so important to you? And I mean, this is true of libertarians, right? You know,
post even, you know, laps libertarians or whatever, like, you know, and when I talk to most people,
like, I'm always like, well, I got, you know, is this logical? Does it make sense? Does it work
all the way through? Most people are like, I don't give a shit. Like, this is what I believe here.
This is what I believe here. And they don't have to be consistent. Yeah. Well, because
if you have a principle that's based on some factual basis that it should be applied consistently,
as consistently as possible, with the recognition, there may be a few exceptions here and there. But
that's the whole point of having a principle is that you apply it evenly across the board, right?
And so again, I just think, you know, people are inconsistent about that. For obvious reasons,
you know, I just want what's good for me and my tribe. And, you know, it's like,
it's like the issue over that the private prayer that the high school football coach gave. Right.
50 yards. The private prayer on the 50 on the 50 players around him. And he's a Christian. Okay.
And of course, Christian is going, yes, this is great. You know, the Supreme Court voted in his
favor. Yeah, well, what if we was down there saying Alou Akbar? Yeah. Oh, no, no, no, no, no, we're
not going to allow that. Oh, okay. So what's the principle here? Yeah, thankfully, as this is what
Satanists exist for, they're already filing to do satanic prayers on the 50 yard line. And, you
know, this also like takes us away from the question of like, okay, well, it's football,
like why are high schools playing football? I don't know, you know, like I was a taxpayer,
I'm kind of like, I they can't even teach our kids to read. And now they're giving them brain
damage or whatever. That's a separate issue. Well, let's, let's talk about trans athletes and
what is a woman you wrote. Most recently, you looked at Matt Walsh's documentary, what is a
woman and you know, he is a right wing troll. He, you know, wants to make fun of feminists,
he wants to make fun of gender activists and things like that. But the documentary you found
pretty compelling and interesting. Can you talk a bit about that? I was expecting something of a
Borat like send up or a Milo Yiannopoulos kind of troll. And it wasn't that bad. I've seen him
elsewhere. And yes, he's definitely in the kind of that Ben Shapiro classical conservative issues.
And I disagree with him on most of his beliefs. But I, but what made the film powerful is he's
not saying the things that are crazy. It's the people he's interviewing. And it's not like he,
like Borat, he gets a couple of guys drunk and they start yammering away about the blacks and
the Jews or whatever. Here's the underbelly of America. He's not doing anything like that.
He's going to the, you know, here's a professor of gender studies. You know, what is a woman?
It's right there in your title, gender women studies. You know, what is a woman? This guy
can't answer the question. Okay. So what, what's going on here? I mean, these are smart people.
So the problem here, I think is we're back to the postmodernism. Like I learned from you that,
you know, the original postmodernism was really good. It's kind of a form of skepticism.
Let's challenge the mainstream dogmas back in the 40s and 50s and see, yeah, that's good.
Right. And then it kind of just run, run a muck and goes too far. And I think that's what's happened
here where, and then this particular professor said, you're just trying to tag me with an essentialist
definition of gender. It's like, yeah, that's right. Because to have a fuzzy set or a family
resemblance, you need some agreed upon words that we're going to use of characteristics that
define this thing. And that's the essence of, you know, so it's the gametes, right? Biologists
say, well, a woman and a man is defined by the gametes. You either make it sperm or you make
it eggs. That's it. And everything else follows from that. And if you look under the hood, there's
a thousand different differences in the body that go toward sperm production and development and so
on, or egg production and development of the fetus and whatnot. And it's not just whatever
my inner feelings are. And that would be kind of the most extreme of postmodernism. Whatever I
feel is the truth, it's my truth. And that's essentially what Walsh's film shows, that these
people have gone that far. Whatever it is you say it is, that's what it is. And why do you think
the trans issue, you've also written about how, you know, when these pulverized alts came out,
I guess earlier this year, it was kind of stunning that if you look at older, you know, the silent
generation, the percentage of people who identify as LGBT, so lesbian, gay, bi and trans, very flat,
baby boomers, flat, Gen X, flat, millennials picks up a little bit. And then Gen Z, people are basically
about under like 25. It is, you know, 10% of the population now says that they are LGBT up from
like half of that in 2017. What's going on with the, you know, with an interest in trans,
being trans? Do you think it is that people are, there are more trans people now, or is this all
kind of a rhetorical gesture? And how do you deal with this? Yeah, well, we don't know for sure,
because it's so new. What is the normal background rate of gender dysphoria, where you feel like
from a very young age that you were born in the wrong body. Now, before recently, it was like
maybe one tenth of 1%, or even less, a 20th of 1%, just vanishingly small. And now all of a sudden,
you have, you know, these spikes of like 4,000% increase in this one age core, like age 14 to
19, you know, that kind of thing. And so that would suggest the social contagion hypothesis
that is it spreads amongst a community of people that are either in the same classroom in school,
or they're on an online community. And they get a lot of social proof and positive feedback if they
say I'm this, you know, by pan on whatever. And I had a student a couple of years ago, who in the
middle of class, this was a small seminar, so we talked a lot. And she said, I've decided I'm a boy,
this is what I feel like I'm going to be a man. And she changed her name, and everybody called her
the name, including me, cut her hair, change her clothes, and so on. And then but but in the
conversations that ensued, it was clear to me, she doesn't want to be a man, she wants to be trans.
That's the thing to be. And the moment you announce that is like, Oh, my God, what's that?
And, you know, a thousand questions from the other students. And it's like, I see. So now the other
hypothesis is that societies become more liberal, tolerant, open, some more people are coming out.
Right. Now that is true with the with, I think, gays and lesbians, although now we're having a
backlash, say some of the lesbians and gays that, you know, where are all the lesbians now? And
their concern, and I agree, this is a concern, is that what if you're a 13, 14 year old, young
man or young boy, and you find yourself attracted to other boys. And somebody tells you that's
because inside you're a girl, you're not actually gay. When in fact, this person's most likely
going to grow up to be gay, which is now okay. That's accepted, right? Now, another thing I've
been thinking about is, is it that because the LGBTQ or the gay marriage, same sex marriage,
they happen so fast from 2011, when the majority of Americans finally tipped over to above 50%
in support to 2015, the Supreme Court decision to make it the law of the land, that was pretty
fast. That's probably the fastest rights revolution ever. So it could be the next, you know, sort of
cohorts, like, well, what are we going to champion? You know, what's next, you know, there's animal
rights, but there's gender rights. And so LGBTQ is one thing. So the focus has primarily been about
who you are attracted to. And that used to be against the law, you can't be attracted to the
same sex people, you can't have sex with that was illegal. People were fired in the government.
Thousands were fired for that. And now that's okay. So they've kind of shifted it to okay, what about
who you identify as a woman, that's kind of become maybe the next rights revolution and people,
again, they want to be engaged in something that's meaningful in life. There's a next rights
revolution there. And I'm going to go for that. In, you know, when we were younger, and I'm thinking
in the 70s and whatnot, being trans and it was back then it was short for transsexual. And it
always implied surgical, like gender reassignment surgery. And I'm thinking of people like the
tennis player Renee Richards, who had been Richard Raskin, I believe, who joined the ladies
professional tennis tour. But it was very much about, you know, physicality. I mean, obviously,
there were hormone treatments and things like that. But it was like, if you were a man and you
wanted to become a woman, you got the surgery. And that's what defined it. And you were saying
before that like the equipment isn't necessarily the definition of being male or female. Today's
trans, it seems to be much more about performing a kind of almost public sexuality. Yes, right.
How does that, yeah, how does that factor into any of this? Well, again, I think that supports the
social contagion hypothesis. The whole point of doing it is to make it public. Or else, why would
you do it? Whereas before it was, you know, a private thing, except for the public figures
like Renee Richards, you know, this is just something you do because that's what you need to do.
And, you know, our mutual friend, Deirdre McCluskey, you know, was Donald McCluskey and
transitioned to great cost to her personal life. This wasn't like she's getting love bombed by
everybody. Quite the contrary, and did it anyway, and still does it because that's who she is. Okay,
that exists. That's a real thing. But is it true that, I mean, I've been hearing stories and reading
accounts, you know, like half the class or a quarter of the class of a high school class says
I'm trans or bi or pan or there's something. So it also looks like being cisgender straight is about
the boringest thing you could be. And you don't want to be that. And actually, a number of gay and
lesbian friends of mine, you know, they like gay men, white gay men feel like they are even
more square than heterosexuals, because heterosexuals are talking about kinks and poly
and stuff like that. And lesbians, you know, because lesbians have always been a smaller
percentage of the population. And I know people like Abigail Schreyer, who I've talked to, I know
you have, who's quite controversial in a lot of things, but she argues that particularly girls
who would grow up to be lesbian, their parents, I mean, this is kind of a complicated argument. But I
I kind of buy into it that their parents are actually almost homophobic, and they would rather
that their child be trans than to be lesbian, which seems I mean, I guess what I'm asking you
is, I mean, you have witnessed and participated in like this vast kind of rights revolution over
the past 50 years, where society is so much more profoundly libertarian than we could have imagined
in the bicentennial. And I picked that not because of bi, but because it's like 76, right?
But it's like you can, you know, you can be gay, you can be straight, you can be anything, and it
does not seem to be an impediment to any kind of social success, any kind of professional
success. Yeah, so that's progress, right? It really is. Yeah, right. But, you know, just from
a scientist's perspective, what is the real number? Yeah. And we don't know. But I suspect that
current numbers we're seeing now are greatly exaggerated. I mean, back when the Kinsey report
came out, you know, he reported what 10% of the guys are gay. Right. And I mean, which in a study
that was clearly poorly designed, right, or kind of like cooked data. Yeah. I mean, the real number
is probably something like three to 5%. And then it's also curious to know what, why are there
not as many lesbians? It looks like maybe that how many lesbians are is like half of how many gay
guys are. Why is that, you know, that there could be some social aspects. How much, this is kind of
a bizarre question, but we are at freedom fest, so we can talk about whatever we want. But how,
how much of sexual orientation do you think is kind of baked in, you know, when you come out of
the womb, you know, and how much of it is susceptible to kind of social influence?
Well, I think most of it's baked in biologically, genetically, you know, in the womb, chemistry,
and so on. After that, of course, it could be tweaked a little bit, but, you know, the vast
majority of people that identify, you know, are cisgender, also cisgender. And yes, society could,
you know, the, you know, the whole blue and pink thing, that used to be reversed like a century
and a half ago, I forget, maybe like 1890s or something, you know, that the blue and pink thing
was different than it is now. And by that, you mean pink was associated with men, and blue was,
you know. I forget why that was, but in any case, but it's not like the colors of the toys are going
to make the little boy more masculine. We've all seen the pictures of Hammingway in a dress as a
kid, and it's like his latent homosexuality had nothing to do with the way he was raised,
right, or something. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I do think the born this way, I think
the other interesting thing about the current trans movement is that the gay community fought for
decades for a kind of biological determinism. I wasn't born this way. It's not a lifestyle choice.
Your little reparative programs are not going to work, you can't de-convert me. If I just had the
right woman, then I would know, you know, how to be straight or anything like that. So, and the
reason for that also is that if you're born that way, then you're a protected class, you're right
stand. But now the trans movement seems to be saying, you could be anything you want, anytime
you want, you can change from day to day, you can change genders, you know, you can change who
you're attracted to. It's totally fluid. And that's actually scary for gays, because it's like, well,
hang on, now we're going to get pushed back from the conservatives, they're going to go, oh,
so you are not that born that way. In that case, we can fix you.
And all of this exists when we're talking about rights or the individual's relationship to
government or something is totally separate. Like, so, I mean, because regardless of why people are
trans or identify as trans or gay or straight or whatever, it doesn't, that doesn't imply
the government should discriminate against them in any way, shape or form.
Yeah, of course, right. Trans rights are human rights. Absolutely. You should not be fired for
being trans. I mean, if that's the only reason, then no, for the same reason,
gays should have been fired decades ago. With trans athletes, you've written about
this. And on a certain level, and particularly at the highest levels possible, when we're talking
about Olympic athletes or NCAA athletes or something, it's such a small number of people,
it almost seems wrong to be looking at that and then kind of generalizing backwards. Because by
definition, these people are extreme outliers in performance and everything. But how do you,
you know, what, what is your sense of like, what is fair for, you know, trans athletes competing
against, you know, biological male or female? Well, so if you're born male, and you go through
puberty, there are so many changes that are substantive. If you compare to female body
development in puberty, after that's happened, and the international swimming body just made
this decision based on that argument that it's too late, there's no amount of testosterone
suppression you're going to take to even the playing field with the average amount of testosterone
that men have versus women, if we could just lower those after puberty, it's too late. I mean,
all the big changes have been made, the bones are bigger and denser, the the sinews and muscles
and ligaments and tendons are all different, the VO2 uptake for your lungs, your oxygen capacity,
and on and on and on, just like a thousand different differences. And now it's true, there are, again,
two overlapping sets. There are some women who are much more physically strong and so on than some men,
but that's not what we're talking about. We're talking about, you know, kind of the average,
the two means. Although sometimes they get kicked out of a limb, you know, say track and field and
things like that. Yes, well, you know, the where people have naturally dopers. Well, those were
dopers, right? But I'm sorry, I'm blanking on her name now, the South African runner who's a woman,
or is always identified as a woman and who's fantastic, but has elevated levels of testosterone
and other things, can't compete internationally unless she reduces that. Is that fair? I mean,
it might be that you need to have some kind of system. So you have to draw the line somewhere,
right? You know, so I mean, so on average, there's a pretty vast differences between average
testosterone levels. And it's not just testosterone. That's kind of the big one, right? So you're going
to have, but you have two overlapping bell curves. So some of the higher women are going to be higher
than some of the lower men. Okay. But and so then you have to make it so the outliers, well, this
woman is right up against the upper limit. And well, okay, so this is the rule we made. So we got a,
you know, because, should we be looking at a world beyond what, like, why do we have male and
female sports competitions? Well, because if we didn't, there'd be no women in sports. You know,
I mean, they just wouldn't, you are stepping in it everywhere. You're like, side show,
Bob hitting breaks everywhere you go. Have you seen the doubles match in tennis where I think
it's Federer and the doll on opposite sides and each of them has a top woman. I think one of them
was the William Sisters and one of the other top ones. And the women can't even get a racket on
the male serve. I mean, they can't, I mean, they're like diving and rolling on the grass and they
can't even hit it. That's what would happen. There would be no women players at all. That would be
the end of women's sports. That's just the way it is. That's reality. You know, I'm not talking
about chess or something like this, but these physical sports like that, you know, when I was
directing Race Across America in the 90s. Explain what that was because that's a phenomenal kind
of event, which, yeah, it's worth rehearsing. Yeah. So in 1982, me and three other guys started
this race called Great American Bike Race, later changed to Race Across America Ram. So this is
a nonstop coast to coast race. Each rider, a cyclist has a support crew that follows them.
The clock starts and stops when you're done. And so you can skip sleep or whatever. And so this
was because it was the Reagan 80s. We were all worried about nuclear annihilation and we were
coped out of our minds. So we were just going to ride our bikes across America. This is the rise of
the Ironman Trabzon and the Adidarod dog sled race. Let's just go crazy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway,
so by the night, of course, we had women right away enter the race and we had a women's division
and a women's prize and plaques and rings and all that stuff. And but in 93 and 94, I had,
when I was race director, I had two women, a Shauna Hogan and Muffy Ritz, who were better than
all of the men for the first thousand miles, all the way into Colorado. And there was talk like,
well, maybe a woman could win the race, right? And if I recall correctly, I think with the
anthropologist Ashley Montague, at various points in the early 70s, hypothesized that women
were designed by evolution to be better ultra marathoners than men. It's kind of true in
the longer people race, gender falls apart. It falls, it becomes less important, but you're
considered. If it's, yeah, but not say something like a high speed race. Right. Like 200 front
stage is pretty long. Yeah. But women wouldn't last, you know, the first 20 minutes. So what happened
in that case? So they're leading up through Colorado and then what happened? Yeah, what happened
while she got caught and then, you know, finished over a day behind the winning men
at the winning two or three men beat her. And it's just strength. Ultimately, it's just every
little bit of difference in the bodies that it just made a difference over 10 to nine days rather
than the first three days. So, you know, but I even asked the women, you know, would you like a,
just have one division and you compete against them? No, no, because it's not fair. Right.
Guys are just on everything stronger. So let me go back to something where we're talking about
the start of this. You know, there seems to be a tendency, Ia Wilson was a, you know, a conventional
liberal, you know, and towards the end of his life, you know, he's very big on things like climate
change and all of that. Like he subscribed to a lot of, you know, kind of bromides of progressive
liberal policy. But within the concept of socio biology and whatnot, there does seem to be a
real tension on, you know, broadly on the left where it's like we, we can create the world however
we want. Like we believe in evolution because we believe in science and we are not those rubes in
Arkansas, you know, who are Christian, who are biblical, literalists and reject science, we believe
in science. But then, you know, Wilson's theories kind of suggest that no, like if you take evolution
seriously, there are going to be limits on how much you can engineer humanity. And there are going
to be different groups even will select for different properties and characteristics that
are going to have real world outcomes. Is that a tension within kind of the science community
and either the right or the left? Well, yes, but, but Picker points out in his book, The Blank Slate,
that in fact, the opposite is true that of course, biology and genetics is part of it.
The environment can't operate on nothing. It has to operate on a physical system,
which is the brain, which is designed by your genes, made of proteins. And so it's not possible
that it can't have any effect. And so you have to understand what the effects are before you can
re-engineer society to make it fair. You know, Thomas Soule wrote a book about this,
this kind of conflicting worldviews and that is kind of utopian worldview where it's all blank
slates and we can re-engineer society to make it perfectly equal. We'll always fail because we're
not perfectly equal. You know, we have different interests, different physical characteristics
and skills and so on. Well, that's just the way it is. So there you need kind of a more general
principle that says wherever you fall on the bell curve of whatever it is we're measuring,
you should have the opportunity to do whatever it is you want without any barriers based on
these protected classes that you didn't choose, right? Kind of a Rawlsian argument. You don't know
which, what your running speed is going to be or what your IQ is going to be. So we have to make
it fair that there, you have access to all the different jobs and the chips fall where they may.
Wilson at the end of his life, maybe the last decade or so, endorsed group
selection. Now group selection is more supported by liberals in the left because it's this idea that
we as a group can be the target of selection and make things happen that the individual can't.
Now most evolutionary biologists, people like Dawkins and Pinker say now this is not true.
There's no evidence for this and it's still the individual genome of the individual is the one
that is the target of natural selection. But I just thought that was interesting toward the
ends of his life. It was a more liberal kind of argument he was making. And I mean, Steven J.
Gould was, I guess what I'm getting at is that you, science, I mean people and maybe it's libertarians
or scientists want to believe that I am arguing from science and reality into my politics. But
perhaps these are separate spheres. Not necessarily. I'm willing to leap over
humans while separating is or not. We do it all the time. I mean, the way things are,
we have to structure society in a way based on human nature. And again, just fairness should be
our goal. Why fairness? Well, again, kind of a Rawlsian argument that you don't know where you're
going to be. So we have to make it as fair as possible. And then you do whatever you want.
And we're not going to have equal outcomes. This is the problem today is that the drive
toward equal outcomes. No, no, it because we're never going to get equal outcomes.
Just for a thousand different reasons. So just equal opportunities is the goal.
But yeah, anyway, so, but yeah, so there is a tension of people like Gould and Wilson on the
left about, well, what about genetics? This is just a misunderstanding. It says Pinker and I
agree with him that, you know, you're just misreading this thing like it. If it's genetic,
you can't change it. No, in fact, that's not true. Right.
Let's talk about gun control because you've written and this is probably one of the issues
where you depart most from a kind of libertarian orthodoxy. But you believe in gun control.
And can you make the briefcase for that? And, you know, why do libertarian or maybe not libertarians,
let's say, Second Amendment fundamentalists in your phrase, where are they wrong?
Well, society is filled with collective action problems. We need to solve as a group.
And to do that, you have to get, you know, a majority and then they all have to chip in
like paying taxes. Again, it's just most libertarians are not anarchists and they agree, okay, we need
property rights and therefore we have to have a court system to support your property rights.
And we need a police force and the prison system and a military. All of a sudden,
you have a big government that you got to fund with taxes. All right. How is this any different?
Why is guns separate? In my opinion, it's because guns are almost totemic as a proxy
for something else. This kind of focus on individual autonomy, freedom, self-defense,
liberty, freedom from the government, that sort of thing. Over and above all the other
concessions you've already made, you know, okay, I'm going to pay for police and fire and military
and so on. And if I don't pay my taxes, they're coming to get me at some point. I'll get the
letters and then, you know, and so forth. But eventually men with guns will come to your house.
Yeah. Right. Why you've signed on for that, you know, so. But I think that's why they want the guns
because well, I know. But yeah, but why would okay. So yeah, right. So but why would you support
that? Because you've already agreed that well, we need somebody to protect my property rights
through a court system that I'm willing to pay for. Well, how about the guy over there? He doesn't
want to pay for it. Well, then send men with guns over there and he has guns. You know, this this
lead in a way this kind of fanaticism about just arm everybody. You know, is a way of saying the
United States is a failed state. And it's just everybody's on their own. And we don't really
trust the police or the military to do their job. We don't trust our institutions. We give up. It's
like we're living in Somalia. Well, no, we're not living in Somalia. I can see if you live there
while you want a gun or something. And I do get that, you know, if I'm an African American living
in inner city, and I don't trust the police, because they're not trustworthy, and they can't get
there in time. And there's violence around me, I should have a gun. So again, not by an area,
you know, I'm not anti gun at all. I grew up with guns. My stepfather was a hunter. So I had a BB gun
and a pellet gun, then a 20 gauge shotgun, then a 12 gauge shotgun. And for 20 years, I had a hand
gun at my house in Altadena. And, you know, but it's just we're facing a social problem. How do
we solve it? The carnage is, you know, more people die by guns than by cars.
And is that I mean, one of the things that is true, I mean, gun homicides have been going down,
you know, since the mid 90s. So there's slight upticks and things like that. But the suicides,
you know, I mean, that's like more than half of gun deaths, right? So that's part of what your
argument is, right? Yeah, right. Yeah. Right. So how about just how about just regulation in the form
of more better background checks, right? And we already have laws about, you know, men with
restraining orders against their significant other. I mean, when a woman is murdered, it's like 90% of
is by a significant other after they broke up or got divorced or child custody issues, something
like that. You know, why have the gun there? If he already has a restraining order, he can't buy a gun,
a lot of those laws are already in place, just enforce them, you know, the gun show loophole.
Are you sympathetic to the argument that, yeah, I mean, this is the point, we have tons of gun
laws and they don't seem to be, you know, they're in the same way that we, you know, you can't be
utopian about certain things like school shootings are horrible, but they are not, they're not common
enough where that's where you make all the laws. To be honest, man, I'm ready to give up on the whole
thing and just say fuck it. I mean, it's just, just let everybody, everybody have their guns
because there's already 400 million guns, right? 120 guns for every 100 people. So we're talking
about 400 million guns in America. We're not going to get them back. You know, if the government
said we're doing a buyback or a take back program, it'd be like Waco every day. Yeah, Ruby Ridd.
It's fascinating too that actually as more guns are in circulation, it's in a fewer percentage
of households, which, so fewer people are having, owning more guns. And I'm not, I'm not, I'm not
particularly, you know, focused on the gun issue, but that seems like an interesting social change.
Right. And I'm not sure what accounts for it, or if that's good or bad or different.
Yeah. You know, in the examples that I use, everybody uses, you know,
Austria and Australia, other countries have done these things and it worked. Yeah, but they're
smaller, a genius population. They didn't have very many guns in the first place. They don't have
the same culture that we have about guns, second amendment, all that. I don't know. I don't know
how, I don't know what the solution is. It seems like somebody should do something and I know how
libertarians respond to that. Yeah, the government, we don't want the government to do more. It's
already doing too much. Okay. But again, like back to the analogy with cars, pretty much everybody's
signed off in the idea, well, cars should be regulated. You know, seatbelts are good,
and airbags are good. And, you know, that even though the number of car deaths still hovers
like 35 to 40,000 a year, but, but, but if you adjust it by the miles driven, cars are much safer
now. Right. They used to be. And why is that government regulation? You have to have seatbelts.
Oh, you're speaking heresy now. I know. I know. That government can never do anything good.
I don't see how that would have happened just by private enterprise.
Yeah. That's, I mean, that's a, it's a serious challenge to a kind of knee jerk libertarianism,
which I think, you know, people who still call themselves libertarians like myself,
I need to take up that mantle and sometimes I can and sometimes I can't. Yeah.
I mean, but just one last point, collective action problem, like the motorcycle helmet thing,
you know, and back when that happened, you know, libertarians, a lot of motorcycle, I'm not going
to do it. Right. Or they would wear these, you know, little nothing helmets. You know, I get that.
I totally get that. But, you know, the way our medical system operates, eventually,
you know, you and I, you have to pay for these accidents and these head injuries.
Do you, I'm assuming you grew up riding bicycles without helmets. And then when did you start,
when you were a bike racer? Yes. Well, that happened in the accident.
But are they effective? Yes. The current helmets are totally effective. Yes.
Because they're designed on, based on motorcycle helmet design. It's a, it's a compressed polystyrene
shell that on impact, it absorbs like 95% of the impact. And they work. The bike helmets before
that. These are the old leather strap ones. Completely worthless. Yeah. At the, at the
den show when I worked for, at the bike show, when I worked for Bell helmets, they were one of my
sponsors. We used to take one of those leather hair nets and have the people come by, okay,
put your fist inside there. Yeah. Now slam it against that brick wall. Like, no, I'm not,
are you kidding me? Yeah. Now do it with one of these helmets. No problem. Right. It's like,
that's your head, right? But was that, you know, was that innovation driven by
superior technology and information or was it by mandate? This is, well, by mandate because
enough people were died in the tour de France from head injuries that the tour itself said,
hey, we need to mandate helmets. So, and when I was working for Bell at the time, they were saying,
they already had the bell shell, which was this white geeky looking helmet. And they've had this
for like 15 years. No one was buying it. No one serious cyclists would not wear it. So I said,
you need to design it to look like a leather hair net. So it's got to be black and, you know, thin
with some air, some air vents and maybe a little gold trim. It's got to look cool. And you got to
get pros to wear it. And the people go, all right, you know, and that helped, but it wasn't until it
was mandated. And again, this collective action problem, most cyclists wanted to wear helmets
because they know it's safer. But when some of them don't wear it, they get a slight advantage.
It's like, well, I got to, it's like doping. I got to do it because that guy's doing it, right?
And then once it's mandated, okay, no one gets to take the drug, everyone has to wear a helmet.
And it's like, okay, good. I want to take you down a slight detour. Now that we're talking about the
tour de France and also about technology and innovation and doping and things like that.
Greg LeMond was the first American to win the tour de France. And he's like a fascinating figure
who also embraced every technological innovation he could. And there was one tour de France,
in particular, where he beat Laurent Fignon, who eschewed technology. It was like, oh, that's
like American stupidity and things like that, lost by seconds over, you know, a 21 day, you know,
race. How important is, you know, our, is like understanding technology and innovation and
kind of pushing that forward? How, you know, how is the best way to make that happen or more people
embrace that? Well, it happens naturally, it kind of trickles down from the pro ranks to serious,
you know, weekend athletes and people have more money now and the bikes are better than they used
to be. They really do get better. Like I get a new bike every three to four years. And they,
every one of them is really better than the previous one. You know, maybe just a little bit,
just 1%, 2% you can feel the difference. And you know, disc brakes instead of the rim brakes,
they're better, electronic shifting is better. And it just kind of starts to add up. But because
the market, because of capitalism, you know, what would have been say a $15,000, $20,000 bike I
could get for like 6,500 now, because so many people are buying them because they really are
better and you see all the pros racing. Do you think this is part of the problem of our current
moment? And now I'm leaping from kind of technological innovation and bike racing or something to,
in general, I mean, the world is so much better than it was 50 years ago, but we don't seem to
want to recognize that or acknowledge that. And is that a problem? Well, you don't see it. It's
hard to see. Because it happens slow enough, like again, the bike thing, you know, if I was a regular
weekend warrior or whatever, and maybe I'd buy a bike every 10 years, and oh, okay, I really see it.
But when you buy him incrementally, he's like watching your kid grow. You see the pictures
from three years ago. Oh, wow, you got big. You don't notice it, right? And, you know, that's hard
to see. You know, Pinker talks about that. And Matt really does, you know, you know, just the cost
of how many hours a week you have to work to get your dinner or your light. You know, Matt has
those charts. Yeah. And it's like, oh, wow, I mean, it's just just very incrementally, very slowly
over decades and centuries. And, you know, from day to day, we don't see that. Because our senses
are geared to immediate environment, you know, the next day, the next week, that's about it. That's
all we care about. Because we're really designed to pay attention to threats. So the negativity
bias. So we focus on bad things rather than the good things, and also immediate threats. And the
way the world works, because of second law and entropy, is that, you know, good things happen
mostly very gradually, slowly over long periods of time. But bad things can happen. Boom. You know,
you get the stroke or the heart attack, or the company goes out of business, the stock collapses,
the country falls. These things happen very quickly. So we're tuned to looking for those
kind of threats. Because those are the things that took us out. Just to close out the tour to
France, you know, beginning with Le Monde and going through Lance Armstrong. This, to me, I
found it interesting that, you know, Americans didn't care about bike racing. It was like
ridiculously European and all of that. And it was kind of like soccer in the 70s and 80s. It
like picked up. And then Lance Armstrong, and you know, and people after Americans after him who were
caught doping and cheating and whatnot after protesting that they hadn't. You know, now we
don't care about bike racing in the same way, right? And is that, you know, has that happened
all over society? Where I mean, we live in an era now, things are getting better and better,
but our trust and confidence in institutions and in society have been declining. You know,
how do we deal with that kind of dynamic? Interesting analogy. Yeah, well, there are
Americans in the tour this year, but they're not doing that well. It definitely punctured the,
I mean, there was a growing interest in things like professional cycling and certainly the tour.
You know, and I guess, and it's even broader than, you know, just America. I mean, the revelation of,
you know, profound doping, which in a way goes back to the very early beginning of the tour.
There were doping controversies that vary from the beginning, and I'm kind of big on performance
enhancing drugs. I kind of, you know, I don't just let everybody do it. Well, or yeah, I mean,
but then you do have rules and the, but you know, yeah, yeah, I'm with you. And I mean, I guess if
it didn't trickle down to junior athletes that are up and coming and you get that again, that you
get that kind of collective action problem and like, well, I don't want to do it, but that guy's
doing it and I want to get to his level and so on. And that's how it happens. That's how it
happened with Lance. I mean, it's unfortunate. He was not able to articulate that very clearly
on Oprah's couch there that, you know, when he didn't start any of this, he just did it better
than everybody else was doing it. And he hired the top guy and said, you can't work for anybody
else to give you pile of money to an exclusive. And, and, you know, but there's, you know, when
he was first starting and he was getting his ass kicked and, you know, it's like, why is this
happening? And somebody said, see that guy there and that guy there, they're doping. They're using
this, they're using that. They're going to that guy over there. He's the top doping. Oh, okay.
And then, so here's the choice. I either do it or I'm out. Right. And then, you know, you don't
get to fulfill your dreams. So they do it. You know, it's a, it's a rational choice, I think.
And there's, I mean, I guess in, in humans, would you say in evolution, there's this, there are
these two tendencies. One is that we want excellence, but then we also, and we're willing to do almost
anything for it, but then we are very disappointed, if not in ourselves and our heroes, when they
actually do what we're kind of urging them to do, which is take, you know, pay any price in order
to become the best or something. Right. Yeah, I'm not sure you have to put it at such extremes,
though, because you have spectacular performances that you, where you don't need the drugs,
maybe, but again, you just have to, you have to have good enforcement. I mean, there was an interesting
thing when Rafa won the French Open this year, and then it came out like a week later that his,
his foot was all shot up with all kinds of drugs and stuff because he has some weird
problem there. And a couple of cyclists were commenting, boy, if we did that, we'd be kicked out
and we'd be shamed and humiliated in the front pages of the newspapers. And it is true, the doping
agencies like the, you know, that governs sports are terrible and very arbitrary and just incompetent,
I mean, in many ways. And I can recall Olympic swimmers, you know, losing their gold medals
because they had taken the wrong kind of cold medication or whatever. Whereas the NFL, you
know, their program was, you know, the doping agency has to contact the player's agent and then
set a date to test it like in three weeks. Okay, no problem. We'll clear it all out.
Let's close up by talking about Skeptic, the Skeptic Society, Skeptic Magazine, 30 years
and running. You know, explain what the Skeptic Society is about.
Well, we're a 501c3 nonprofit. Science education is our thing, critical thinking,
rationality, you know, reason, that there, you know, commitment to universal realism,
there is a reality, we can know something about it, albeit not perfectly, you know, that kind of
enlightenment ideals of the search for objective truth through tried and true methods, you know,
that's kind of our thing. And just, we just try to tackle subjects that are important.
Right. And as you see with the abortion issue, trans issue, next one on race, you know, we've
already done astrology, big foot, UFOs, you can only do those things so much. And it's like, okay,
we pretty much know what the story is there. It's amazing how the Loch Ness sponsor and
the Bermuda Triangle, just people don't care about those anymore.
No, I know they're out, but UFOs are back because of the UAP thing.
Absolutely. Yeah. But and although it seems like this is the end of UFOs, right, like it's obvious
that it's, you know, it's not extraterrestrial. It should be obvious to everybody, although it's
still pretty popular that ancient alien show is on its 18th season. I mean, it's up there with the
apprentice or something, right? But so I want to ask you, is this a good time to be a skeptic
in terms of like, does rationality and again, understanding that it's imperfect, we all have,
you know, our cognitive bias and all of that kind of stuff. Is there more broadly speaking,
are we more rational than we were 50 years ago? Or is that never the way to really think about
things? This is a big debate in cognitive psych circles of to what extent are we naturally gullible
and we fall for things like cults and scams, things like that, because people do fall for those
things. But the counter argument to that is, in fact, most people don't fall for cults and scams.
The reason these scammers have to send out, you know, a million emails to get one sucker is because
most people are not suckers, right? And, you know, most people who join religious sex and groups
and self-help groups, and they go to Tony Robbins, you know, weekend, they're not joining cults. And
if the thing turned into a cult, they probably would leave, right? So we only hear, there's an
availability here, we only hear about the ones, you know, the Jonestown and Waco and, you know,
sort of the crazy ones, the, you know, Heaven's Gate. But those are really rare, right? And so I've
been thinking about this, you know, to what extent this is called default to truth. You know, when
you tell me something, I just tend to believe you because I know you, I don't have time to fact check
everything you tell me. So there's kind of a social trust that most of the time works, right?
And I was just telling people about the story I read of this guy, a cyclist, who, do you know what
Strava is? You know, you post your rides on this app. And then on Strava, there's these King of the
Mountain KOM, every segment is timed. And, you know, there's thousands of people have done that
segment. And you can see what the average speed was. You try to go out there and break that guy's
time order. Well, so there was this guy who turns out he was like a total con man fraud,
you know, an impersonator. I mean, he said he had, he was a CEO of a major corporation. He had been
in IPO startups and he was in special forces and on and on and on. And he was a professional bike
racer on this European team. And the people wherever he was living in California, I think,
you know, no one bothered to check until he posted a time on a Strava KOM that somebody
saw and went, that's not possible. The speed was like what a top European pro would do. And this
guy's like 45 years old is like, wait a minute, I'm going to look into what else he's done, right?
But, but if I just heard, you know, I was in the special forces, okay, I mean, I wouldn't even know
how to check if you told me that. Who would I call this was, you know, Nick, really a Navy
seal guy? I wouldn't even know, right? So I think for the most part, we're not gullible so much as
the trust thing works pretty well most of the time. But evolution did not eliminate all the
psychopaths and the free riders and the liars and the deceivers and the cheaters, because that would
take too much energy to get rid of every last one, right? So a society can tolerate like a small
percentage of, of con men and liars and cheaters and thieves and so on, and still function reasonably
well. What's your favorite cult? Well, I guess this is going to sound crazy, the cult of Trump
at the moment. Yeah, I mean, I really think it is something like that. You know, the fit just
even just yesterday, just after the latest January six hearings where it's obvious to anyone with
eyes and ears that, you know, he knew he lost and he was just to make a grab for power and you
still see some of these Republican toadies. Yeah, tons of Republicans, people running for office
saying that the election was stolen. Right now, it could be there just opportunists saying, I got
to say whatever I think the boss wants me to say so that he gives me his endorsement so I can win
the election. I don't really believe it. That's possible. But what concerns me is that, you know,
like 60% of self identified Republicans say they, and they have nothing to gain. They just,
yeah, I think there was, I think rigged, right? I think it was rigged. That's a kind of conspiracy
theory and maybe even a cult that's not on the fringe. What's the, you know, what's the status
of skepticism? It's more important than ever. Because, you know, most of these conspiracy
theories that I've used to deal with, you know, the JFK or 9-11, they're pretty fringy, right?
And this one is, you know, right there at the top of the government. And I'm worried this could
threaten our democracy, right? If enough people believe this, they won't accept the outcome of
the next election. Do you worry going into the midterms by all accounts that Democrats are going
to lose big for a variety of historical reasons? President, when the president is unpopular in
his first midterm election, they, you know, he loses 25 to 35 seats, etc. Democrats are already
starting to rehearse how these elections, you know, the Supreme Court is not legitimate. The
Republicans have stripped people of voting rights all over the place. Do you worry that?
I do. So we're going to go from a right-wing conspiracy theory about
illegitimate elections to a democratic one. Yes. Well, the Dems have always had conspiracy
theories whenever they lost. If you just go back to the last 50 years in every election,
this one was slightly different because it ended up at the Capitol. But,
but yes, of course, they're going to, I'm worried that if a Republican genuinely wins,
say in 24, whoever it is, maybe DeSantis, hopefully not Trump, that the Dems won't accept it. They'll
just say, nah, we know they were doing this behind the scenes and the gerrymandering this and that.
This was all illegal. And then what? You know, then we're in trouble. Well, although I suspect
skeptic magazine circulation is going to go up. I don't know. Or it's going to go out of business.
One or the other, right? I find most people, they're not that interested in the truth. You have
to kind of remind them this is why this is important. I feel like Liz Cheney sometimes,
you know, standing up there going, you know, what actually happened matters, reality matters, right?
And I mean, what a funny thing. I mean, she's my hero. And I don't agree with her on almost
everything, politics, right? You know, she's pro-life. Do you hope, I mean, well, do you hope
people are becoming more independent minded? I mean, that would help. I like Andrew Yang's
idea of a third, a viable third party. Of course, he's not the first, forward party. I like this
idea. And I'm not a big UBI guy. But you know, I think we, the duopoly, he talks about the duopoly,
you know, Germany, where my wife's from, they have what, six or seven parties that are viable
parties. No one gets more than 50%. I mean, no one gets more than really 20, 25%. That's good.
That sounds great. That's a good note to end on. Michael Shermer, thanks for talking.
You're welcome. Thanks for having me.